@c ======================================================================
@node net ssh
@subsection Secure Shell (SSH)
The @code{(weinholt net ssh)} library hierarchy deals with the Secure
Shell protocol. Both SSH servers and clients can be written with these
libraries. Some convenient abstractions are currently missing though,
e.g.@: a channel abstraction. These libraries hide the details of the
wire protocol and the cryptographic algorithms. The protocol is
standardized by a series of RFCs: 4250, 4251, 4252, 4253, 4254, etc.

No TCP server abstraction is provided by Industria. To make a server
you will probably need to use your implementation's network
abstractions.

It remains to be seen if this interface can be used for interactive
applications. One problem is @code{get-ssh}, which reads a whole SSH
packet. This procedure is blocking. @rnrs{} doesn't provide any
procedures for event-driven programming, so the author has made no
effort to make this library work in an event-driven setting.

@menu
* net ssh connection::   Secure Shell Connection Protocol
* net ssh transport::    Secure Shell Transport Layer Protocol
* net ssh userauth::     Secure Shell Authentication Protocol
@end menu

@deffn Parameter ssh-debugging
This SRFI-39 parameter controls debug output. It is a bit field with
three bits currently defined. Bit 0 enables general trace messages,
bit 1 enables packet traces and bit 2 enables packet hexdumps.

@emph{Default}: @code{#b000}
@end deffn

@deffn Parameter ssh-debugging-port
This SRFI-39 parameter controls where debug output is written to. It
defaults to the error port that was current when the library top-level
was run.
@end deffn

@deffn Parameter identification-protocol-version
This SRFI-39 parameter is used when constructing the local
identification string. It specifies which SSH protocol version number
is supported.

@emph{Default}: "2.0"
@end deffn

@deffn Parameter identification-software-version
This SRFI-39 parameter is used when constructing the local
identification string. It specifies the name and version of the client
or server.

@emph{Default}: "Industria_1"
@end deffn

@deffn Parameter identification-comments
This SRFI-39 parameter is used when constructing the local
identification string. It is @code{#f} or optionally a string of
comments. This field is sometimes used to identify a vendor.

@emph{Default}: @code{#f}
@end deffn

The following parameters are when constructing the local kex exchange
packet. It lists the preferred algorithms. You may remove and reorder
the algorithms, but you can't introduce new ones without first adding
them to @code{(weinholt net ssh algorithms)}. The defaults may change
in the future.

@deffn Parameter preferred-kex-algorithms
This is a list of key exchange algorithm names in the order they are
preferred.

@emph{Default}:
 ("diffie-hellman-group-exchange-sha256"
  "diffie-hellman-group-exchange-sha1"
  "diffie-hellman-group14-sha1"
  "diffie-hellman-group1-sha1")
@end deffn

@deffn Parameter preferred-server-host-key-algorithms
This is a list of host key algorithm names in the order they are
preferred. The server may have more than one host key and this is used
to decide between them.

@emph{Default}:
 ("ecdsa-sha2-nistp256"
  "ecdsa-sha2-nistp384"
  "ecdsa-sha2-nistp521"
  "ssh-rsa" "ssh-dss")
@end deffn

@deffn Parameter preferred-encryption-algorithms-client->server
This is a list of encryption algorithm names in the order they are
preferred for communication from the client to the server.

@emph{Default}:
 ("aes128-ctr" "aes192-ctr" "aes256-ctr" "aes128-cbc"
  "aes192-cbc" "aes256-cbc" "blowfish-cbc" "arcfour256"
  "arcfour128" "3des-cbc")
@end deffn

@deffn Parameter preferred-encryption-algorithms-server->client
This is a list of encryption algorithm names in the order they are
preferred for communication from the server to the client.

@emph{Default}:
 ("aes128-ctr" "aes192-ctr" "aes256-ctr" "aes128-cbc"
  "aes192-cbc" "aes256-cbc" "blowfish-cbc" "arcfour256"
  "arcfour128" "3des-cbc")
@end deffn

@deffn Parameter preferred-mac-algorithms-client->server
This is a list of message authentication code algorithms in the order
they are preferred for communication from the client to the server.

@emph{Default}: ("hmac-md5" "hmac-sha1" "hmac-sha1-96" "hmac-md5-96")
@end deffn

@deffn Parameter preferred-mac-algorithms-server->client
This is a list of message authentication code algorithms in the order
they are preferred for communication from the server to the client.

@emph{Default}: ("hmac-md5" "hmac-sha1" "hmac-sha1-96" "hmac-md5-96")
@end deffn

@deffn Parameter preferred-compression-algorithms-client->server
This is a list of compression algorithms for packets transmitted from
the client to the server.

@emph{Default}: ("none")
@end deffn

@deffn Parameter preferred-compression-algorithms-server->client
This is a list of compression algorithms for packets transmitted from
the server to the client.

@emph{Default}: ("none")
@end deffn

@deffn Parameter preferred-languages-client->server
This is currently not used.

@emph{Default}: ()
@end deffn

@deffn Parameter preferred-languages-server->client
This is currently not used.

@emph{Default}: ()
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-ssh-client binary-input-port binary-output-port
Starts an SSH client connection over the two given ports, which should
be connected to a server via TCP (or some other similar means).

If everything goes right an @code{ssh-conn} object is returned.
The @emph{peer identification} and @emph{kexinit} fields are valid.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure make-ssh-server binary-input-port binary-output-port @
                                 keys
Starts an SSH server connection over the two given ports, which should
be connected to a client via TCP (or some other similar means).

@var{keys} is a list of host keys. The currently supported key types
are @code{dsa-private-key} and @code{ecdsa-sha-2-private-key}.

If everything goes right an @code{ssh-conn} object is returned.
The @emph{peer identification} and @emph{kexinit} fields are valid.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure ssh-key-exchange ssh-conn
This runs the negotiated key exchange algorithm on @var{ssh-conn}.
After this is done the client will have received one of the server's
public keys. The negotiated encryption and MAC algorithms will have
been activated.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure ssh-conn-peer-identification ssh-conn
The identification string the peer sent. This is a string that
contains the peer's protocol version, software version and optionally
some comments.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure ssh-conn-peer-kexinit ssh-conn
This is the peer's key exchange initialization (kexinit) packet. It
lists the peer's supported algorithms. @xref{net ssh transport}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure ssh-conn-host-key ssh-conn
The server's public key. This has unspecified contents before the
@code{ssh-key-exchange} procedure returns.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure ssh-conn-session-id ssh-conn
The session ID of @var{ssh-conn}. This has unspecified contents before
the @code{ssh-key-exchange} procedure returns.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure ssh-conn-registrar ssh-conn
Returns a procedure that can be used to register parsers and
formatters for SSH packet types. The returned procedure should be
given as an argument to @code{register-connection} and
@code{register-userauth}.
@c this should probably be part of the private interface:
@c The procedure takes three arguments: an integer representing a packet
@c type, a parser and a formatter. The parser takes a single argument: a
@c buffer object (as defined in @code{(weinholt net buffer)}) and returns
@c an ssh-packet object. The formatter takes a binary output port and a
@c packet. It writes the packet to the port, starting with the @emph{u8}
@c that identifies the packet type.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure ssh-error ssh-conn who message code irritants ...
Sends a @code{disconnect} packet to the peer. The packet contains the
message and the code. The connection is then closed and an error is
raised.

The error code constants are defined elsewhere. @xref{net ssh transport}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure put-ssh ssh-conn pkt
Sends the SSH packet @var{pkt} to the peer of @var{ssh-conn}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure get-ssh ssh-conn
Reads an SSH packet object from the peer of @var{ssh-conn}. The
end-of-file object will be returned if the peer has closed the
connection. The procedure blocks until a message has been received.
Any messages of the type @code{ignore} are ignored.

Packet types must be registered before they can be received. Initially
only the transport layer types are registered. If an unregistered type
is received this procedure returns a list of two items: the symbol
@code{unimplemented} and the unparsed contents of the packet. A packet
of type @var{unimplemented} is sent to the peer.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure close-ssh ssh-conn
Flushes the output port of @var{ssh-conn}, and then closes both the
input and output ports.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure flush-ssh-output ssh-conn
Flushes any pending output on @var{ssh-conn}.
@end deffn

The procedures below are used in the implementation of key
re-exchange. After the initial key exchange either party can initiate
a key re-exchange. RFC 4253 has the following to say on the subject:

@quotation
It is RECOMMENDED that the keys be changed after each gigabyte of
transmitted data or after each hour of connection time, whichever
comes sooner.  However, since the re-exchange is a public key
operation, it requires a fair amount of processing power and should
not be performed too often.
@end quotation

The demonstration program @code{secsh-client} contains an example of
how to initiate key re-exchange. The server demonstration program
@code{honingsburk} also handles key re-exchange, but does not initiate
it. @xref{honingsburk}.

@deffn Procedure build-kexinit-packet ssh-conn
Constructs and returns a key exchange packet for use by the local
side.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure key-exchange-packet? pkt
Returns @code{#t} if @var{pkt} should be given to
@code{process-key-exchange-packet} for handling by the key exchange
logic.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure ssh-key-re-exchange ssh-conn peer-kex local-kex
Initiates key re-exchange on @var{ssh-conn}. This requires the peer's
key exchange packet @var{peer-kex}, and the local key exchange packet
@var{local-kex}. The procedure returns before the key re-exchange is
finished. Both sides of the algorithm will need to communicate to
complete the exchange.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure process-key-exchange-packet ssh-conn pkt
Updates the key exchange logic on @var{ssh-conn} with the contents of
@var{pkt}. If the packet is a @code{kexinit} packet and @var{ssh-conn}
is a server, then this will automatically initiate the key re-exchange
algorithm.

The procedure may return the symbol @code{finished} to indicate that
the key exchange algorithm has finished and the new algorithms are
used for packets sent to the peer.

@var{Note}: This interface is currently balanced in favor of servers.
More experience in using the library is needed to determine how to
make the key re-exchange interface better for clients. Suggestions are
welcome.
@end deffn

@noindent
Version history:
@itemize
@item
@code{(1 0)} -- Initial version.
@end itemize


@c ======================================================================
@node net ssh connection
@subsubsection Secure Shell Connection Protocol
The @code{(weinholt net ssh connection)} library implements record
types, parsers and formatters for the connection protocol packets in
SSH.

The connection protocol handles two types of communication: global
requests and channels. The global requests can be used to setup TCP/IP
port forwarding. Most communication over SSH passes through channels.
Channels are opened with the @code{channel-open} requests. The client
and the server each assign an ID number to a channel: one ID is sent
in the @code{channel-open} packet, the other ID in the
@code{channel-open-confirmation} packet. In Industria all packets that
are directed to a specific channel inherit from the
@code{channel-packet} record type and the ID can be found with the
@code{channel-packet-recipient} procedure.

Strings and bytevectors may be used interchangeably when constructing
packets. Strings will automatically be converted with
@code{string->utf8}. When these packets are received the parser will
either parse those fields either as a string or a bytevector. A
bytevector will be used when the field can contain more or less
arbitrary data, e.g.@: filenames.

The text of this section uses the words ``packet'', ``message'' and
``request'' interchangeably.

See RFC 4254 for a more detailed description of this protocol.

@deffn Procedure register-connection registrar
Registers the packet types for the connection protocol so that they
may be received and sent. A registrar may be obtained from an ssh-conn
object using @code{ssh-conn-registrar}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-global-request type want-reply?
Constructs a global request: a connection request not related to any
channel. Some global requests contain additional fields. These
requests are represented by the @code{global-request/*} packets.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure global-request? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{global-request?} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure global-request-type pkt
This field contains a string identifying the type of the request,
e.g.@: @code{"no-more-sessions@@openssh.com"}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure global-request-want-reply? pkt
This field is true if the sender expects a @code{request-success} or
@code{request-failure} record in response.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure make-global-request/tcpip-forward want-reply? address port
Constructs a request that instructs the server to bind a TCP server port
and forward connections to the client.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure global-request/tcpip-forward? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{global-request/tcpip-forward} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure global-request/tcpip-forward-address req
This field is a string that represents the address to which the server
should bind the TCP server port. Some addresses are given special meaning:

@table @code
@item ""
The server should listen to all its addresses on all supported protocols
(IPv4, IPV6, etc).
@item "0.0.0.0"
The server should listen to all its IPv4 addresses.
@item "::"
The server should listen to all its IPv6 addresses.
@item "localhost"
The server should listen to its loopback addresses on all supported
protocols.
@item "127.0.0.1"
The server should listen to its IPv4 loopback address.
@item "::1"
The server should listen to its IPv6 loopback address.
@end table
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure global-request/tcpip-forward-port req
This field is an integer representing the port number to which the
server should bind the TCP server port. If the number is @code{0} and
@var{want-reply?} is true, the server will pick a port number and send
it to the client in a @code{request-success} packet (the port number
can be recovered with @code{(unpack "!L" (request-success-data
response))}).
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-global-request/cancel-tcpip-forward want-reply? address port
Constructs a message that undoes the effect of a
@code{global-request/tcpip-forward} request.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure global-request/cancel-tcpip-forward? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{global-request/cancel-tcpip-forward} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure global-request/cancel-tcpip-forward-address req
See @code{global-request/tcpip-forward-address}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure global-request/cancel-tcpip-forward-port req
See @code{global-request/tcpip-forward-port}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-request-success data
Constructs a packet which indicates that the previous
@code{global-request} was successful.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure request-success? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{request-success} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure request-success-data pkt
This field contains a request-specific bytevector which is mostly
empty.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-request-failure
Returns an object which indicates that a global request failed.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure request-failure? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{request-failure} packet.
@end deffn


All requests to open a channel are represented by
@code{channel-open/*} packets.

@deffn Procedure channel-open? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-open} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open-type pkt
A string representing the type of the @code{channel-open} request,
e.g.@: @code{"session"}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open-sender pkt
This is the ID for the sender side of the channel.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open-initial-window-size pkt
This is the window size of the channel. The window size is used for
flow-control and it decreases when data is sent over the channel and
increases when a @code{channel-window-adjust} packet is sent. Each
side of a channel has a window size.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open-maximum-packet-size pkt
This is the maximum allowed packet size for data sent to a channel. It
basically limits the size of @code{channel-data} and
@code{channel-extended-data} packets.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-open/direct-tcpip sender-id initial-window-size @
            connect-address connect-port originator-address originator-port
Constructs a request to open a new channel which is then connected to
a TCP port.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open/direct-tcpip? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-open/direct-tcpip} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open/direct-tcpip-connect-address pkt
This is the hostname or network address that the TCP connection should
be connected to.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open/direct-tcpip-connect-port pkt
This is the port number that the TCP connection should be connected to.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open/direct-tcpip-originator-address pkt
This is the network address of the machine that made the request.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open/direct-tcpip-originator-port pkt
This is the port number on which the request was made. This is useful
when a client implements forwarding of client-local TCP ports.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-open/forwarded-tcpip sender-id initial-window-size @
            maximum-packet-size connected-address connected-port @
            originator-address originator-port
This request is used by the server to tell the client that a TCP
connection has been requested to a port for which the client sent a
@code{global-request/tcpip-forward} request.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open/forwarded-tcpip? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-open/forwarded-tcpip} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open/forwarded-tcpip-connected-address pkt
The address to which the TCP connection was made.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open/forwarded-tcpip-connected-port pkt
The port to which the TCP connection was made.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open/forwarded-tcpip-originator-address pkt
The remote address of the TCP connection.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open/forwarded-tcpip-originator-port pkt
The remote port of the TCP connection.
@end deffn



@deffn Procedure make-channel-open/session sender-id initial-window-size @
            maximum-packet-size
Construct a request to open a session channel. This type of channel is
used for interactive logins, remote command execution, etc. After the
channel has been established the client will send e.g.@: a
@code{channel-request/shell} or a @code{channel-request/exec} request.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open/session? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-open/session} packet.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-open/x11 type sender-id initial-window-size @
            maximum-packet-size originator-address originator-port
Constructs a message that opens an X11 channel. This message can be
sent after X11 forwarding has been requested.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open/x11? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-open/x11} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open/x11-originator-address pkt
The network address that originated the X11 connection.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open/x11-originator-port pkt
The network port that originated the X11 connection.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure channel-packet? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-packet} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-packet-recipient pkt
This field is an integer that identifies the ID of the channel that
should receive the request.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-open-failure recipient reason-code description language
Constructs a packet that represents a failure to open a channel. It is
sent in response to a @code{channel-open/*} request.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open-failure? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-open-failure} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open-failure-reason-code pkt
@vtable @code
@item SSH-OPEN-ADMINISTRATIVELY-PROHIBITED
@item SSH-OPEN-CONNECT-FAILED
@item SSH-OPEN-UNKNOWN-CHANNEL-TYPE
@item SSH-OPEN-RESOURCE-SHORTAGE
@end vtable
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open-failure-description pkt
This field is a human-readable reason for why the channel could not be
opened.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open-failure-language pkt
This field is most commonly unused and set to @code{""}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-open-confirmation recipient @
            sender initial-window-size maximum-packet-size
Constructs a message that indicates a channel was successfully opened
(identified by @var{recipient}). The party that sends this message
will include its own channel ID (@code{sender}).
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open-confirmation? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-open-confirmation} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open-confirmation-sender pkt
This field contains the sender's ID for this channel.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open-confirmation-initial-window-size pkt
This is the sender's initial window size. Analogous to the initial
window size in a @code{channel-open/*} request.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-open-confirmation-maximum-packet-size pkt
This is the sender's maximum packet size. Analogous to the maximum
packet size in a @code{channel-open/*} request.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-window-adjust recipient amount
This constructs a packet that is used to increment the window size of
channel @var{recipient} by @var{amount} octets. It tells the remote
part that the channel may receive additional data. If the client has
assigned to a channel a receive buffer of 4096 bytes and the server
sends 4096 bytes, the server will not be able to successfully send
more data until the client has processed some of the buffer. When
there is more room in the buffer the client can send a message of this
type.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-window-adjust? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-window-adjust} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-window-adjust-amount pkt
This field contains the number of bytes that will be added to the
window size.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-data recipient value
This constructs a request that sends data over a channel. 
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-data? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-data} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-data-value pkt
This field contains a bytevector with data being sent over the
channel.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-extended-data recipient type value
This constructs a message that works just like @code{channel-data},
except it contains an additional @var{type} field (explained below).
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-extended-data? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-extended-data} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-extended-data-type pkt
Data sent by a @code{channel-data} packet will normally be sent to a
port connected with standard output. A @code{channel-extended-data}
field is used when the data destination is a different port.

@vtable @code
@item SSH-EXTENDED-DATA-STDERR
This constant specifies that the destination is the standard error
port.
@end vtable
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-extended-data-value pkt
This field contains a bytevector with the data sent over the channel,
e.g.@: an error message printed on the standard error port.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-eof recipient
This constructs a packet that signals the end-of-file condition on the
channel identified by the @code{recipient} ID.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-eof? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-eof} packet.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-close recipient
This constructs a message that is used when a channel is closed.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-close? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-close} packet.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-success recipient
This constructs a packet that indicates that the previous request was
successful. These packets are sent in response to requests where
@var{want-reply?} is true.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-success? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-success} packet.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-failure recipient
This constructs a packet that indicates that the previous request was
not successful. These packets are sent in response to requests where
@var{want-reply?} is true.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-failure? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-failure} packet.
@end deffn


@c @deffn Procedure make-channel-request
@c @end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-request} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request-type req
This field is a string that identifies the type of the request, e.g.@:
@code{"break"} or @code{"shell"}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request-want-reply? req
When this field is true the peer will respond with
@code{channel-success} or @code{channel-failure}. This field is not
valid for all requests. Where it is not valid the constructor will not
include it as an argument.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-request/break recipient want-reply? length
This constructs a request that relays a ``BREAK'' signal on the
channel. A ``BREAK'' is a signalling mechanism used with serial
consoles. This request is standardized by RFC 4335.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/break? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-request/break} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/break-length req
The length of the signal in milliseconds.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-request/env recipient want-reply? name value
Constructs a request that can be used before a shell or command has
been started. It is used to set an environment variable (of the same
kind that SRFI-98 accesses).
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/env? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-request/env} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/env-name req
This is a string that identifies the name of the environment variable.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/env-value req
This is a bytevector that contains the value of the environment
variable.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-request/exec recipient want-reply? command
Constructs a request that instructs the server to execute a command.
The channel identified by @var{recipient} will be connected to the
standard input and output ports of the program started by the server.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/exec? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-request/exec} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/exec-command req
This field is a bytevector that contains the command that the server
should try to execute.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-request/exit-signal recipient name core-dumped? @
            message language
This constructs a packet which indicates that the program connected
to the channel identified by @var{recipient} has exited due to an
operating system signal.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/exit-signal? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-request/exit-signal} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/exit-signal-name req
This is a string that identifies the signal by name. For @sc{posix}
systems it is one of the following: @code{"ABRT"}, @code{"ALRM"},
@code{"FPE"}, @code{"HUP"}, @code{"ILL"}, @code{"INT"}, @code{"KILL"},
@code{"PIPE"}, @code{"QUIT"}, @code{"SEGV"}, @code{"TERM"},
@code{"USR1"}, @code{"USR2"}. Other signal names may be used by
following the guidelines in section 6.10 of RFC 4254.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/exit-signal-core-dumped? req
This field is true when the operating system saved a process image
(``core dump'') when it sent the signal.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/exit-signal-message req
This may be a string that explains the signal.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/exit-signal-language req
This string may identify the language used in
@code{channel-request/exit-signal-message}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-request/exit-status recipient value
This constructs a packet which indicates that the program connected
to the channel identified by @var{recipient} has exited voluntarily.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/exit-status? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-request/exit-status} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/exit-status-value req
This is an integer that identifies the exit status of the program. It
is the same kind of number used by the the Scheme procedure
@code{exit}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-request/pty-req recipient want-reply? term columns rows @
            width height modes
Constructs a request that instructs the server to allocate a
pseudo-terminal (PTY) for the channel identified by @var{recipient}.
A PTY is needed for interactive programs, such as shells and Emacs.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/pty-req? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-request/pty-req} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/pty-req-term req
This is a string that identifies the type of terminal that this PTY
will be connected to. If the terminal is compatible with the DEC VT100
the value would be @code{"vt100"}. This value is also the environment
variable @code{TERM}. The set of supported terminal types depends on
the server. Typically the software running on an SSH server uses the
``terminfo'' database.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/pty-req-columns req
This field contains the number of columns the terminal supports, e.g.@:
@code{80}. The @code{channel-request/window-change} request can be
used to update this value if the terminal supports resizing.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/pty-req-rows req
This field contains the number of rows the terminal supports, e.g.
@code{24}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/pty-req-width req
This field specifies the width of the terminal in pixels.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/pty-req-height req
This field specifies the height of the terminal in pixels.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/pty-req-modes req
This is a bytevector that encodes POSIX terminal modes. Unlike the
size of the terminal, it is not possible to change the modes after the
PTY has been created. The client should emulate a terminal set to
``raw'' mode and send a correct list of terminal modes. The server
will then cooperate to handle the rest. This means that, unlike with
telnet, the client will generally not do local ``canonical'' terminal
processing.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure bytevector->terminal-modes bv
Decodes the modes from a @code{channel-request/pty-req}. The return
value is an association list.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure terminal-modes->bytevector modes
The inverse of @code{bytevector->terminal-modes}. All modes specified
by RFC 4254 can be encoded.

@example
(import (weinholt net ssh connection))
(terminal-modes->bytevector '((VINTR . 3) (VERASE . 127)))
@result{} #vu8(1 0 0 0 3 3 0 0 0 127 0)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-request/shell recipient want-reply?
Constructs a request that starts a login shell on the channel
identified by @var{recipient}. Normally a PTY must first have been
connected to the channel.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/shell? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-request/shell} packet.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-request/signal recipient name
Construct a packet that sends a signal to the program connected to
the channel identified by @var{recipient}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/signal? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-request/signal} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/signal-name req
This field contains a signal name of the same type as that used by
@code{channel-request/exit-signal}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-request/subsystem recipient want-reply? name
Constructs a request that a subsystem should be connected to the
channel identified by @var{recipient}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/subsystem? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-request/subsystem} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/subsystem-name req
This field identifies the subsystem being requested, e.g.@: @code{"sftp"}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-request/window-change recipient columns rows width height
Construct a message that tells the server that the terminal window
associated with a channel has been resized. The channel should have a
PTY (see @code{channel-request/pty-req}).
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/window-change? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-request/window-change} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/window-change-columns req
Contains the new character cell width of the terminal window.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/window-change-rows req
Contains the new character cell height of the terminal window.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/window-change-width req
Contains the new pixel width of the terminal window.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/window-change-height req
Contains the new pixel height of the terminal window.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-request/x11-req recipient want-reply? single-connection? @
            protocol cookie screen
Constructs an X11 (X Window System) forwarding request.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/x11-req? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-request/x11-req} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/x11-req-single-connection? req
If this field is true when only one X11 connection should be
forwarded.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/x11-req-protocol req
This field identifies an X11 authentication protocol. The most common
value is @code{"MIT-MAGIC-COOKIE-1"}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/x11-req-cookie req
This is a ``magic cookie'' encoded as a hexadecimal string. It is used
with @code{"MIT-MAGIC-COOKIE-1"}. It is recommended by RFC 4254 that
this cookie should be different from the actual cookie used by the X11
server. When receiving a @code{channel-open/x11} request the cookie
can be intercepted, verified and replaced with the real one.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/x11-req-screen req
An X11 display can have, in X jargon, multiple screens. Normally this
field would be @code{0}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-channel-request/xon-xoff recipient client-can-do?
Constructs a message that tells the client when it can do local
processing of terminal flow control (C-s and C-q).
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/xon-xoff? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{channel-request/xon-xoff} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure channel-request/xon-xoff-client-can-do? req
This flag is true if the client is allowed to do local processing of
terminal flow control. If the flag is false then flow control is done
on the server.
@end deffn


@noindent
Version history:
@itemize
@item
@code{(1 0)} -- Initial version.
@end itemize


@c ======================================================================
@node net ssh transport
@subsubsection Secure Shell Transport Layer Protocol
The @code{(weinholt net ssh transport)} library implements record
types, parsers and formatters for the transport layer packets in SSH.

See RFC 4253 for a description of this protocol.

@deffn Procedure register-transport registrar
Registers the packet types for the transport layer so that they may be
received and sent. A registrar may be obtained using
@code{ssh-conn-registrar}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure make-disconnect code message language
Constructs a packet that closes the SSH connection. After sending or
receiving this message the connection should be closed with
@code{close-ssh}. The @code{ssh-error} procedure may be more
convenient than manually constructing and sending a @code{disconnect}
packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure disconnect? obj
Returns @code{#t} if @var{obj} is a @code{disconnect} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure disconnect-code pkt
This field is an integer that represents the cause of the disconnect.
The reason could be one of these (exported) constants:

@vtable @code
@item SSH-DISCONNECT-HOST-NOT-ALLOWED-TO-CONNECT
@item SSH-DISCONNECT-PROTOCOL-ERROR
@item SSH-DISCONNECT-KEY-EXCHANGE-FAILED
@item SSH-DISCONNECT-RESERVED
@item SSH-DISCONNECT-MAC-ERROR
@item SSH-DISCONNECT-COMPRESSION-ERROR
@item SSH-DISCONNECT-SERVICE-NOT-AVAILABLE
@item SSH-DISCONNECT-PROTOCOL-VERSION-NOT-SUPPORTED
@item SSH-DISCONNECT-HOST-KEY-NOT-VERIFIABLE
@item SSH-DISCONNECT-CONNECTION-LOST
@item SSH-DISCONNECT-BY-APPLICATION
@item SSH-DISCONNECT-TOO-MANY-CONNECTIONS
@item SSH-DISCONNECT-AUTH-CANCELLED-BY-USER
@item SSH-DISCONNECT-NO-MORE-AUTH-METHODS-AVAILABLE
@item SSH-DISCONNECT-ILLEGAL-USER-NAME
@end vtable
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure disconnect-message pkt
This is a human-readable explanation for the disconnect.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure disconnect-language pkt
Most commonly unused, @code{""}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-ignore data
Construct a new @code{ignore} packet using the bytevector @var{data}
as the payload. These packets are ignored by receivers but can be used
to make traffic analysis more difficult.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure ignore? obj
Returns @code{#t} if @var{obj} is an @code{ignore} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure make-unimplemented sequence-number
This constructs a message that should be sent when a received packet
type is not implemented.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure unimplemented? obj
Returns @code{#t} if @var{obj} is an @code{unimplemented} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure unimplemented-sequence-number pkt
Each packet sent over an SSH connection is given an implicit sequence
number. This field exactly identifies one SSH packet.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-debug always-display? message language
Constructs a debug packet. It contains a message that a client or
server may optionally display to the user.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure debug? obj
Returns @code{#t} if @var{obj} is a @code{debug} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure debug-always-display? pkt
If this field is true then the message should be displayed.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure debug-message pkt
This is a string containing the debugging message. If it is displayed
to the user it should first be filtered.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure debug-language pkt
Most commonly unused, @code{""}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-service-request name
This constructs a service request packet. The first service requested
is normally @code{"ssh-userauth"}. @xref{net ssh userauth}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure service-request? obj
Returns @code{#t} if @var{obj} is a @code{service-request} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure service-request-name pkt
This is the name of the service being requested, e.g.
@code{"ssh-userauth"}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-service-accept name
Constructs a request which indicates that access to a requested
service was granted.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure service-accept? obj
Returns @code{#t} if @var{obj} is a @code{service-accept} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure service-accept-name pkt
This field contains the name of the service to which access was
granted.
@end deffn

@c Used privately:
@c @deffn Procedure put-kexinit output-port kexinit
@c @end deffn

@deffn Procedure make-kexinit cookie kex-algorithms server-host-key-algorithms @
            encryption-algorithms-client-to-server encryption-algorithms-server-to-client @
            mac-algorithms-client-to-server mac-algorithms-server-to-client @
            compression-algorithms-client-to-server @
            compression-algorithms-server-to-client @
            languages-client-to-server languages-server-to-client @
            first-kex-packet-follows? reserved
Constructs a @code{kexinit} packet, which is used as part of the key
exchange algorithm. The arguments are explained below. You probably
want to use @code{build-kexinit-packet} instead of this procedure.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure kexinit? obj
Returns @code{#t} if @var{obj} is a @code{kexinit} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure kexinit-cookie pkt
This field is a random bytevector. It is used in the key exchange to
make things more difficult for an attacker.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure kexinit-kex-algorithms pkt
A list of the supported key exchange algorithms (mostly variations on
Diffie-Hellman).
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure kexinit-server-host-key-algorithms pkt
A list of the supported host key algorithms.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure kexinit-encryption-algorithms-client-to-server pkt
A list of the supported encryption algorithms for packets sent from
the client to the server.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure kexinit-encryption-algorithms-server-to-client pkt
A list of the supported encryption algorithms for packets sent from
the server to the client.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure kexinit-mac-algorithms-client-to-server pkt
A list of the supported Message Authentication Code (MAC) algorithms
for packets sent from the client to the server.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure kexinit-mac-algorithms-server-to-client pkt
A list of the supported Message Authentication Code (MAC) algorithms
for packets sent from the server to the client.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure kexinit-compression-algorithms-client-to-server pkt
A list of the supported compression algorithms for packets sent from
the client to the server. The algorithm @code{"none"} is currently the
only implemented compression algorithm.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure kexinit-compression-algorithms-server-to-client pkt
A list of the supported compression algorithms for packets sent from
the server to the client. The algorithm @code{"none"} is currently the
only implemented compression algorithm.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure kexinit-languages-client-to-server pkt
Normally never used. Set to the empty list.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure kexinit-languages-server-to-client pkt
Normally never used. Set to the empty list.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure kexinit-first-kex-packet-follows? pkt
If this field is true then the server and client will try to cooperate
in order to make the key exchange run faster over connections with
high latency. This optimization only works when the server and client
both prefer the same algorithms.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure kexinit-reserved pkt
This field must be zero.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure make-newkeys
Constructs a new @code{newkeys} packet. This message is used as part
of key exchange to notify the remote side that new encryption keys are
being used.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure newkeys? obj
Returns @code{#t} if @var{obj} is a @var{newkeys} packet.
@end deffn


@noindent
Version history:
@itemize
@item
@code{(1 0)} -- Initial version.
@end itemize

@c ======================================================================
@node net ssh userauth
@subsubsection Secure Shell Authentication Protocol
The @code{(weinholt net ssh userauth)} library implements record
types, parsers and formatters for the authentication protocol packets
in SSH.

See RFC 4252 for a more detailed description of this protocol. In this
protocol the client sends packets of type @code{userauth-request}. The
type names that start with @code{userauth-request/} are sub-types that
contain user credentials. All other packet types documented here are
sent by the server.

All user authentication requests contain a user name, a service name
and a method name. The service name most commonly used is
@code{"ssh-connection"}, which requests access to the connection
protocol. @xref{net ssh connection}.

@deffn Procedure register-userauth registrar
Registers the packet types for the authentication protocol so that
they may be received and sent. A registrar may be obtained using
@code{ssh-conn-registrar}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure register-userauth-password registrar
Registers the packet types for the password authentication protocol.
This is a supplement to @code{register-userauth}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure register-userauth-public-key registrar
Registers the packet types for the public key authentication protocol.
This is a supplement to @code{register-userauth}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure deregister-userauth registrar
Deregisters all authentication protocol packet types.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-userauth-request username service method
Constructs a new user authentication request. This particular
procedure is only good for constructing requests that use the
@code{"none"} method. When such a request is sent to the server it
will respond with a list of available authentication methods. To make
a proper request use one of the @code{make-userauth-request/*}
procedures below. Those procedures automatically include the correct
@var{method} in the request. The @var{service} is normally
@code{"ssh-connection"}. @xref{net ssh connection}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-request? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{userauth-request} packet. This
includes @code{userauth-request/password} packets, and so on.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-request-username request
This returns the user name field of @var{request}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-request-service request
This returns the service name field of @var{request}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-request-method request
This returns the method name field of @var{request}. Examples include
@code{"none"}, @code{"password"} and @code{"publickey"}.
@end deffn

If the server does not like the credentials provided in a
@code{userauth-request} it will send a @code{userauth-failure} packet.

@deffn Procedure make-userauth-failure can-continue partial?
Constructs a message that indicates to the client that the user
authentication request was not successful.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-failure? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{userauth-failure} packet. These
packets indicate the the client was denied access to the requested
service. The credentials might be incorrect or the server might be
requesting additional authentication requests (see below).
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-failure-can-continue failure
This returns a list of authentication methods that ``can continue'',
i.e.@: methods that might be successful given that correct credentials
are provided.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-failure-partial? failure
This is a boolean that indicates partial success. The server might
require multiple successful authentication requests (see RFC 4252).
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-userauth-success
Constructs a packet that indicates to the client that the user
authentication was successful. The client can now use the requested
service (e.g.@: the connection protocol). This message has no fields.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-success? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{userauth-success} packet.
@end deffn

The server can send a banner before the user authenticates. The banner
might often contain a warning about unauthorized access.

@deffn Procedure make-userauth-banner message language
This constructs a textual message that the server can send to the
client. The client software can then display it to the user. This
happens before user authentication is attempted and often contains a
warning about unauthorized accesss.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-banner? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{userauth-banner} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-banner-message banner
This field is a message that the client can show to the user.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-banner-language banner
This field might indicate the language of the text in the banner, but
is most commonly empty and not used.
@end deffn

The client can try to authenticate with a password. Note that the
unencrypted password is seen by the server. It's important to check
hosts keys to make sure you're connecting to the right server.

@deffn Procedure make-userauth-request/password username service password
Constructs a user authentication request. This is a normal attempt to
login with a user name and password. There is an alternative protocol
for these types of login requests: the @code{"keyboard-interactive"}
method (support is planned).
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-request/password? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{userauth-request/password}
packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-request/password-value request
Returns the password field for this user authentication request.
@end deffn

The server can request that the client should change its password.

@deffn Procedure make-userauth-password-changereq prompt language
This constructs a password change request. Some servers might send
this packet if e.g.@: they use a password expiry system.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-password-changereq? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{userauth-request/changereq}
packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-password-changereq-prompt changereq
This is the message to show the user when prompting for the new
password.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-password-changereq-language changereq
This is the language used in the password change request prompt.
@end deffn

After having received a request to change its password a client may
send a @code{userauth-request/password-change} packet.

@deffn Procedure make-userauth-request/password-change username service old new
Constructs a request to authenticate the user and at the same time
change the user's password. This message may be sent without having
received a @code{userauth-request/changereq} packet. Please see
section 8 of RFC 4252 for the meaning of the packet that the server
will send in response to this packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-request/password-change? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{userauth-request/password-change}
packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-request/password-change-old request
This field contains the user's current password.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-request/password-change-new request
This field contains the user's new password.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-userauth-request/public-key-query username service key
Before performing a potentially expensive private key operation the
client may ask the server if a specific key might be used to
authenticate.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-request/public-key-query? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{userauth-request/public-key-query}
packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-request/public-key-query-algorithm request
This field is automatically filled in by
@code{make-userauth-request/public-key-query} to contain the public
key algorithm name of the key contained in the query.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-request/public-key-query-key request
This field contains an SSH public key.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure make-userauth-public-key-ok algorithm key
The server sends @code{userauth-public-key-ok} to indicate that the
user may try to authenticate with the given key.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-public-key-ok? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{userauth-public-key-ok} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-public-key-ok-algorithm request
This is a copy of the algorithm name contained in the
@code{userauth-request/public-key-query} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-public-key-ok-key request
This is a copy of the public key contained in the
@code{userauth-request/public-key-query} packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure make-userauth-request/public-key username service public-key
This procedure creates an @emph{unsigned} request to authenticate with
public key cryptography. The client may try to authenticate itself by
sending a signed request to the server. The server will have a copy of
the public key on file, e.g.@: stored in the user's
@code{authorized_keys} file. By using the public key it can confirm
that the client is possession of the corresponding private key. The
packet returned by this procedure may be signed with
@code{sign-userauth-request/public-key}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-request/public-key? obj
Returns true if @var{obj} is a @code{userauth-request/public-key}
packet.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-request/public-key-algorithm request
This field indicates the public key algorithm name of the public key
in the request. It is automatically filled in when the request is
constructed.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure userauth-request/public-key-key request
This field contains an SSH public key object.
@xref{crypto ssh-public-key}.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure sign-userauth-request/public-key request session-id private-key
This generates a signed @code{userauth-request/public-key} packet. It
needs an unsigned @var{request}, which may be created with
@code{make-userauth-request/public-key}. The @var{session-id} can be
recovered with @code{ssh-conn-session-id}. The @var{private-key} must
be a private DSA or ECDSA key (support for RSA signing is planned).
The signed request uses the SSH connection's session ID and can
therefore not be used with any other connection.
@end deffn


@noindent
Version history:
@itemize
@item
@code{(1 0)} -- Initial version.
@end itemize
